# Computer System Architecturew
A Computer system can be organized in a number of different ways, which we can categorize roughly according to the number of general-purpose preocessors used.

## Single-Processor System
- On a single-processor system, there is one main CPU capable of executing a general-purpose instruction set.
- Almost all single-processor systems have other special-purpose processors as well.
    - They may come in the form of device-specific processors, such as disk, keyboard, and graphics controllers
    - In mainframes, they may come in the form of more general-purpose processors, such as I/O processors.
### Special-purpose processor
- Run a limited instruction set and do not run user process.
- Sometimes, they are managed by the operating system, and in this case, the operating systemsends them information about their next task and monitors their status.
- It relieves the main CPU of the overhead.
- special-purpose processors are low-level componenets built in to the hardware. So the operating sysem can't communicate with these processors; they do their jobs autonomously.
> If there is only one general purpose CPU, then the system is a single processor system.

## Multiprocessor System
- Multiprocessor system have two or more processors in close communication, sharing the computer bus and somtimes the clock, memory, and peripheral devices.
### Advantage of multiprocessor systems
1. Increased throughput
    - By increasing the number of processors, we expect to get more work done in less time.
    - The speed-up ratio with N processors is not N; **rather, it is less than N.**
2. Economy of scale
    - Can be cheaper than equivalent multiple Single-processor system, cause they can share peripherals. 
3. Increased rliability
    - The failure of one processor will not halt the system, but only makes system slow.
### How to increase reliability of a computer system?
- Graceful degradation : Continue providing service propotional to the level of surviving hardware.
- Fault tolerant : Some system go beyond **Graceful degradation**
    - Because they can suffer a failure of any single component and still continue operation.
    - Falut torlerance required a mechanism to allow the failure to be detected, diagnosed, and if possible corrected.
### Asymmetric multiprocessing (Boss-Worker relationship)
- A boss processor controls the system
- the other processors either look to the boss for instruction or have predefined tasks.
- The boss processor schedules and allocates work to the worker processors.
### Symmetric multiprocessing(SMP)
- The most common system use symmetric multiprocessing, in which all of the each processor performs all tasks in the operating system. It means that all processor are peers; no boss- worker relationship exists between processors.
- Each processor has its own set of registers, as well as a private - or local cache.
- They share physical memory.
- To avoid inefficiencies, like one processor sit idle while another is overloaded, the processors share certain data structures.
### UMA & NUMA
- UMA(Uniform memory access) is defined as the situation when access to any RAM from any CPU takes the same amount of time.
- In NUMA(Non-Uniform memory access), some part of memory may take longer to access than other parts, creating performance penalty.
- Operating system need to minimize the NUMA penalty through resource management.
### Multicore
1. A recent trend of CPU design is to include multiple computing **cores** ona single chip.
2. It can be more efficient than multiple chips with single core, because on-chip communication is faster than between-chip communication.
3. In addition, one chip whth cumtiple cores uses significantly less power than multiple single-cores chips.
> While multicore systems are multiprocessor systems, not all of the multiprocessor systems are multicore.
### Blade server
- Blade servers are a relatively recent development where multiple processor boards, I/O boards, and networking boards are placed in the same chassis.
- The difference between these and traditional multiprocessor systems is that each blade-server boots independently and runs its own operating system.

## Clustered System
- Clustered system gathers together multiple CPUs.
### loosely coupled
- Clustered systems differ from multiprocessor systems in that they are composed of two or more indicidual system, or nodes, which is joined together.
- Each node may be a single processor system or a multicore system.
- The generally accepted definition is that clustered computer share storage and are closely linked via a local-area network or a faster interconnect.
### High availability
- Service will continue even if one or more systems in the cluster fail.
- If the monitored machine fails, the monitoring machine can take ownership of its storage and restart the applications that were running on the failed machine. So, the users and clients of the applications see only a brief interruption of service.
### Asymmetrically / Symmetrically
- Asymmetric clustering
    1. In asymmetric clustering, one machine is in **hot-standby mode**, while the other is running the application.
    2. The hot-standby host does nothing but monitor the active server.
    3. If the server fails, the hot-standby host becomes the active server.
- Symmetrically clustering
    1. Two or more hosts are running applications and re monitoring each other.
    > This structure is more efficient, since it uses all of the hardware resources.
### Parallelization
- As a cluster consists of several computer systems connected through a network, cluster can be used to provide **High-performance computing** environment.
- They can run an application concurrently on all computers in the cluster. 
### DLM(Distributed lock manager)
- Cause parallel cluster allow mutiple hosts to access the same data on shared storage, It usually require the use of special versions of software and special releases of applications.
- To provide shared access, the system must also supply access control and locking to ensure that no conflicting operations occur.
### Storage-area networks
- It makes possible to attach to a pool of storage.
- If the applications and their data are stored on the SAN, then the cluster software can assign the application to run on any host attached to it.