# Process Management
- A program does nothing unless its instructions are executed by a CPU.
- A process need certain resources, including CPU time, memory, files, and I/O devices, to accomplish its task.
- These resources are either given to the process when it is created or allocated to it while it is running.
### How datas are paseed along?
- To the various physical and logical resources which a process has, when it is created, various initialization data may be passed along
### Process
- **Program by itself is not a process**
- Program
    - Passive entity   
- process   
    - Active entity
### Thread
- A single-threaded process has one program counter which is specifying the next instruction to execute. 
    - The execution of a process must be sequential.
    - Until the process complete, the CPU executes one instruction of thr process after another.
    - At any time, one instruction at is executed on behalf of the process.
- A multithreaded process has multiple program counters, each pointing to the next instruction to execute for a given thread.

## Conclusion
- A process is the unit of work in a system. a system consists of a collection of processes, some of wihch are operating-system processes and the rest of which are user processes. All these processes can potentially execute concurrently by multiplexing on a single CPU.
- The operating system is responsible for the following activities in connection with process management.
    - Scheduling processesand threads on the the CPUs
    - Creating and deleting both user and system processes
    - Suspending andn resuming processes
    - Providing mechanisms for process synchronization
    - Providing mechanisms for process communication