# Protection and Security
- When a computer system has multiple users and allows the concurrent execution of multiple processes, then access to data must be regulated. For that purpose, mechanisms ensure that files, memory segments, CPU and other resources can be operated on by only those processes which have gained proper authorization from the operating system.
### Protection
- Protection is any mechanism for controlling the access of processes or users to the resources defined by computer system.
- This mechanism must provide means to specify the controls to be imposed and to enforce the control.
- Protection can improve reliability by detecting latent errors.
- A protection-oriented system providesa means to distinguish between authorized and unauthorized usage.
### Job of Security
- Though system can have adequate protection, but still be prone to failure and allow inappropriate access.
- To defend a system from external and internal attacks is **Job of Security**.
- Usually, prevention of some of attacks is consifered an operating system function, while other system leave it to policy or additional software.
### User identifiers
- Protection and security require the system to be able to distinguish among all its users.
- Most operating system maintain a list of user names and associated **user identifiers(User ID)**.
- This IDs are numeric and unique, one per user.
- When a user logs in to system, the authentication stage dethermines the appropiate user ID for the user.
### Group identifiers
- In some circumstances, we need to distinguish among sets of users rather than individual user.
- To accompish this, we need to define a group name and the set of users belonging to that group.
- Group functionality can be implemented as a system-wide list of group names and group identifiers.
- A user can be in one or more groups, depending on operating-system design decisions.
- The user's group IDs are also included in every associated process and thread.
### Privileges
- Users somtimes need to escalate privileges to gain extra permissions for an activity.
- For example, the user may need access to a device which is restricted.
- The process runs with **Effective UID** until it turns off the extra privileges or terminates.