# Computer-System Organization

## Computer-System Operation
1. Modern general-purpose computer system consists of one or more CPUs.
2. A number of device controllers connected through a common bus which provides access to shared memory.
3. Each device controller is in charge of a specific type of device.
4. CPU and the device contollers can exevute in parallel, comprting for memory cycles.
5. To ensure orderly access to the shared momory, a memory controller are required.
### How computer start running
1. Need initial program to run usually called **Bootstrap program**.
2. Typically it is stroed in the computer hardware in ROM(Read Only Memory) or EEPROM(Electrically Erasable Programmalbe Read Only Memory), known by the general term firmware.
3. This program initialize all aspects of the system.
4. SO, Bootstrap system must know how to load the operating system and how to start executing the system.
5. The bootstrap program must locate the operating-system kernel and load it into memory.
### How to start kernel
1. Kernel can start providing services to the system, having been loaded and excuting.
2. System processes, or system daemons which run the entire time when the kernel is running, are provided outside of kernel by system programs which are loaded into memory at boot time.
3. After those phase is complete, the system is enough booted to wait for some event to occur.

## Interrupt
### How interrupts are occured
1. Interrupt usually signal the occurence of an event from either the hardware or the software.
2. Hareware trigger interrupt by sending a signal to the CPU.
3. Software may trigger an interrupt by executing a special operation called a **System call**.
### How interrupts are handling
1. When CPU is interrupted, it stops what is is doning and immediately transfer execution to a fixed location.
2. Cause **Interrupt handler** is needed to execute interrupt, the fixed location usually contains the starting address where the service routine for the interrupt is located.
3. After the interrupt service routine executes, CPU resume the interrupted computation.
4. Beause interrupts must be handled quickly, a table of pointers to interrupt routine is called indirectly through the table.
5. After the interrupt is servicedm, the saved return address is loaded in PC(Program counter).

## Storage Structure
- CPU can load instructions only from memory, so any program to run must be stored there.
- General-purpose computer usually run most of their programs from rewriteable memory, which is also called RAM(Random Access Memory).
### Memory structure
- All forms of memory provide an array of bytes.
- Each byte has its own address.
- Interaction is achieved through **load**, and **store** instruction to specific memory address.
    + The load instruction moves a byte or word from main memory to an internal register in the CPU.
    + The store instruction moves the content of register to main memory.
- Aside from loads and stores, CPU automatically loads instructions from main memory to execution.
### Von Neumann architecture
1. Typical instruction-execution cucle, as executed on a system concepts came from von Neumann architecture.
2. First, fetched an instruction from memory and store that instruction in the instruction register.
3. Second, Instruction will be decoded and may cause operand to be fetched from memory and stored in some internal register.
4. Third, the result may be stored back in memory, after the instruction on the operands has been executed.
- We can't reside all programs and data in main memnory, because of those tow reason
    - Main memory is usually too small to store all needed programs and data permanently.
    - Main memory is a volatile storage device.
    - Thus most computer system provide secondary storage as an extension of main memory.
### The wide variety of storage system, in a hierarchy
1. Magnetic disk is one of the most common secondary-storage devices, which provides storage for both programs and data.
    - most programs are stored on a disk until they are loaded into memory.
    - proper management system of disk stroage is of central importance to a computer system.
2. The main differences among the various storage system lie in speed, cost, size, and **volatility**.
3. The higher levels are expensive, but they are faster.
    1. Register
    2. Cache
    3. Main memory
    4. solid-state disk
    5. magnetic disk
    6. optical disk
    7. magnetic tapes
    > The top four levels of memory may be constructed using semiconductor memory.
    > The storage system above the solid-state disk are volatile, whereas those including the solid-state disk and below are nonvolatile.
4. Caches can be installed to improve performance where a large disparity in access time or transfer rate exists between wo components.

## I/O Structure.
- A general-purpose computer system consists of CPUs and multiple device controllers connected through a common bus.
- Each device controller is in charge of a specific type of device.
- The device controller maintains some local buffer sotrage and a set of special-purpose registers
- Typicall, operating system have a device controller and provides the rest of operating system with a uniform interface to the device.
### I/O operation
1. To tart an I/O operation, the device driver loads the appropriate registers in the fevice controller.
2. The device controller, in turn, searches the contents of therse registers to know what action to take.
3. The controller starts the transfer of data from the device to its local buffer.
4. After thr transfer of data is complete, the device controller informs the device driver via an interrupt.
5. Return control to the operating system, possibly returning the data or a pointer to the data if the operationg was a read.
### Direct Memory Access
1. After setting up it's hardware resources, the device controller transfers an entire block of data directly to or from its own buffer storage to memory, with no intervention by the CPU
2. So, only one interrupt is generted per block to tell the device driver that the operation has completed.
3. While device controller is performing thses operations, the CPU is available to accomplish other work.
> Some high-end systems use switch rather than bus architecture. In this case, DMA is even more effective.