# Operating-System Structure
- An operating system provides the environment where programs are executed.
- Internally, operating systems vary in their makeup, since thery are organized along many different lines.
- However, there are many commonalities too, which we are going to consider here.

### Multiprogramming
- One of the most important aspects of operating system is the ability to **multiprogram**
- Usually, a single program cannot keep either the CPU or the I/O devices busy at all times.
- **Multiprogramming** increases CPU utilization by organizing jobs so that the CPU always has one to execute.
### Jop pool
1. The operating system keeps several jobs in memory simultaneosly.
2. Because main memory is too small to accommodate all of the jobs which need to run, initially, the jobs not running are kept on the disk in the job pool awaiting allocation of main memory.
### When will CPU be idle?
1. The operating system picks and begins to execute one of the jobs in memory.
2. If job need to wait for some task, such as an I/O operation, to complete, in a non-multiprogrammed system, the CPU would sit idle, whereas a multiprogrammed system, the operating system simply switched to another job, and so on.
> As long as at least one job needs to execute, the CPU is never idle.
### Time sharing
- **Time sharing** is a logical extension of multiprogramming. In a time sharing systems the CPU executes multiple jobs by switching among them, but the switches occur so frequently that the users can interact with each program.
- Time sharing requires an interactive computer system, which provides direct communication between user and the system.
- Accordingly the **response time** should be short typically less than one second.
- A time shared operating system allows many users to share the computer simultaneously.
- As the system switches rapidly from one user to the next, each user is given the impression that the entire computer system is dedicated to his use, even though it is being shared among many users.
- Time-shared operating system uses CPU scheduling and multiprogramming to provide each user with a small portion of a time-shared computer.
- A time sharing system also provide a file system; hense, disk management must be provided.
- To ensure orderly execution, the system must provide mechanisms for job synchronization and communication, and it may ensure that jobs don't get stuck in a deadlock.
### Process
- A program loaded into memory and executing is called a **process**.
### Requires
- Time sharing and multiprogramming require that several jobs be kept simultaneously in memory.
- If several jobs are ready to be brought into memory, and if there is not enough room for all of them, then the system must choose among them.
- Making upper decision involves **Job scheduling**.
- When the operating system selects a job from the job pool, it loads that job into memory for execution.
- Having several programs in memory at the same time requires some form of memory management.
- In addition, if several jobs are ready to run at the same time, the system must choose which job will run first. Making this decision is **CPU scheduling**.
> Finally, running multiple jobs concurrently requires that their ability to affect one another be limited int all phases of operating system.
### Ensure reasonable response time
- In a time-sharing system, the operating system must ensure reasonable response time.
- This goal is sometimes accomplished through swapping, whereby processes are swapped in and out of main memory to the disk.
- A more common method for ensuring reasonable response time is **virtual memory**
### Virtual memory
- A technique which allows the executions of a process is not completely in memroy.
- The main advantage of the virtual-memory scheme is that it enables users to run programs which are larger than actual physical memory.
- Further, it abstracts main memory into a large, uniform array of storage, separating logical memory as viewed by the user from physical memory.
- This arrangement frees programmers from concern over memory-storage limitations.