# Operating-system operation

## Overview
- Modern operating systems are interrupt driven.
- Events are almost always signaled by the occurrence of an interrupt of a trap which is a software-generated interrupt caused either by an error or specific request from a user program by which an operating-system service be performed.
- For each type of interrupt, separate segments of code in the operating system determine what action should be taken.
- We need to make sure that an error in a user program could cause problems only for the one program running.
- A properly designed operating system must ensure that an incorrect program can't cause other programs to execute incorrectly.

## Dual-Mode and Multimode Operation
- To ensure the proper execution of the operating system, we must be able to distinguish between the execution of operating-system code and user-defined code.
- The approach taken by most computer systems is to provide hardware support which allow us to differentiate among various modes of execution.
### Mode
- At the very least, we need two separate modes of operation : User mode and Kernel mode.
- A bit, called mode bit is added to the hardware of the computer to distinguish the current mode : kernel(0),user(1).
- When a user application requests a service from the operating system, the system must transition from user to kernel mode to fulfill the request.
    1. When system start to boot, the hardware starts in kernel mode. 
    2. The operating system is then loaded and starts user applications in user mode.
    3. Whenever a trap or interrupt occurs, the hardware switches from user mode to kernel mode.s
    4. Hence, whenever the operating system gains control of the computer, it must be in kernel mode.
    5. The system always switches to user mode before passing control to a user program.
### Privileged instructions
- The dual mode of operation provides us with the means for protecting the operating system from errant users and errant users from one another.
- This protection is accomplished by designating some of the machine instructions as **privileged instructions**.
- The hardware allows privileged instructions to be executed only in kernel mode.
### Privilege levels
- The concepts of modes can be extended beyond two modes.
- Different modes are used by various kernel components.
- As an alternativeto modes, the CPU designer may use other methods to differentiate optional privileges.
> Ex) : The intel 64 family of CPU supports four **previlege levels**.
### Life cycle of instruction execution
1. Initial control resides in the operating system, where instructions are executed in kernel mode.
2. When control is given to a user application, the mode is set to user mode.
3. Eventually, control is switched back to the operating system via an interrupt, a trap, or a system call.
### System call
- Overview
    - **System calls** provide the means for a user program to ask the operating system to perform tasks reserved.
    - In all forms, system calls are the method which is used by a process to request action by the operating system.
    - A system call usually takes the form of a trap to a specific location in the interrupt vector.
- How to run
    1. When a system call is executed, it is typically treated by the hardware as a software interrupt. 
    2. Through the interrupt vector, control passes to a service routine in the operating system, and the mode bit is set to kernel mode.
    3. The kernel examines the interrupting instruction to determine what system call has occurred.
    4. The kernel verifies that the parameters are correct and legal, executes the request, and returns control to the instruction which is following the system call.
- Shortcoming
    1. The lack of a hardware-supported dual mode can cause serious **shortcomings** in an operating system.
    2. If operating system does not have mode bit and therefore no dual mode, A user program running awry can wipe out operating system by writing over it with data.
### Hardware protection
- Once there is hardware protection, it detects errors which violate modes.
- When user program fails in some way...
    1. The hardware traps to the operating system.
    2. Trap transfers control through the interrupt vector to the operating system, just as an interrupt does.
    3. Operating system must terminate the program abnormally.
    4. An appropriate error message is given, and the memory of the program may be dumped.
    5. The memory dump is usually written to a file so that the user or programmer can examine it.

## Timer
- We must ensure that the operating system maintains control over the CPU. We can't allow a user program to get stuck in an infinite loop or to fail to call system services and not returning control to the operating system. To accomplish those goals, we can use a **timer**.
- A timer can be set to interrupt the computer after a specified period which may be fixed or variable.
- A varialbe timer is generally implemented by a fixed-rate clock and a counter.
    - The operating system sets the counter.
    - Every time the clock ticks, the counter is decremented.
    - When the counter reaches 0, an interrupt occurs.
- When timer interrupts, control transfers automatically to the operating system, which may treat the interrupt as a fetal error or may give the program more time.
> Clearly, instructions that modify the content of the timer must be privileged.
> We also use timer to prevent a user program from running too long.