# Memory Management

### Main memory
- Main memory is central to the operation of a modern computer system.
- Main memory is a large array of bytes, ranging in size from hundreds of thousands to billions.
- Each byte has its own address.
- Main memory is a repository of quickly accessible data which is shared by the CPU and I/O devices.
- Main memroy is generally the only large storage device that the CPU is able to address and access directly.
- The central processor reads instructions from main memory during the instruction-fetch cycle, both reading and writing data from main memory during the data-fetch cycle.
> To process data from disk for the CPU, those data must first be transferred to main memory by CPU-generated I/O calls.
> In the same way, instructions must be in memory for the CPU to execute them.
### To execute a program
1. To execute a program, it must be mapped to absolute addressed and must be loaded into memory.
2. As the program executes, it accessed program instructions and data from memroy by generating these absolute addresses.
3. When program terminates, its memory space is declared available, so the next program can be loaded and executed.
### Memory Management
- To improve both the utilization of the CPU and the speed of the computer's response to its users, general-purpose conputers must keep several programs in memory, creating a need for memory management.
- In selecting a memory-management scheme for a specific system, we must take into account many factors, especially the hardware design of the system, since each algorithm requires its own hardware support.
### operating system's responsible in connection with memory management
- Keeping track of which parts of memory are currently being used and who is using them.
- Deciding which processes and data to move into and out of memory.
- Allocating and deallocating memory space as needed
