# Storage Management

## Overview
- To make computer system convenient for users, the operating system provides a uniform, logical view of information storage.
- The operating system abstracts from the physical properties of its storage devices to define a logical storage unit, the **file**.
- The operating system maps files onto physical media and accesses these files via the storage devices.

## File-System Management
- File management is one of the most visible components of an operating system.
- Each of physical media has its own characteristics and physical organization.
- Each medium is controlled by a device which also has its own unique characteristics which contain followings.
    1. Access speed
    2. Capacity
    3. Data-transfer rate
    4. Access method
### What is file?
- A file is a collection of related information defined by its creator.
- Commonly, files represent programs and data.
- Data files may be numeric, alphabetic, alphanumeric, or binary.
> In the other words, Files may be free-form.
### How file is handled?
- The operating system implements the abstract concept of a file by managing mass-storage media, such as tapes and disks, andthe devices which control them.
- Normally, files are organized into **directories** to make using files easier.
- When multiple users have access to files, it may be desirable to control.
### Responsibility of Operating system for file Management
1. Creating and deleting files.
2. Creating and deleting directories to organize files.
3. Supporting primities for manipulating files and directories.
4. Mapping files onto secondary storage.
5. Backing up files on stable(nonvolatile) storage media.

## Mass-Storage Management
- Since main memory is too small to accommodate all data and program, and as the data which it holds are lost when power is lost, the computer system must provide secondary storage to back up main memory.
- Most programs are stored on a disk until loaded into memory, using the disk as both source and destination of their processing.
- The entire speed of operation of a computer may hinge on the speeds of the disk subsystem and the algorithms which manipulate that subsystem.
### Responsibility of operating system for disk management.
- Free-space management.
- Storage allocation.
- Disk scheduling.
### Teriary storage devices
- There are many uses for storage which is slower and lower in cost than secondary storage.
- Magnetic tape drives, and their tapes and CD and DVD drives and platters are typical tertiary storage devices.

## Caching
### Example of working cash memory
1. Information is normally kept in some storage system.
2. As it is used, it is copied into a faster storage system - the cache - on a temporary basis.
3. If we need a particular piece of information, we first check whether it is in the cache.
4. If it is, we use the information directly from the cash.
5. If it is not, we use the information from the source, putting a copy in the cache under the assumption which we will need it again soon.
### cache for main memory
- Internal programmable, such as index registers, provide a high speed cache for main memory.
- The programmer implements the register-allocation and register-replacement algorithms to decide which information to keep in registers and which to keep in main memory.
### Why is cash needed?
1. Cashes are implemented totally in hardware.
2. For instance, most systems have an instryction cache to hold the instructions which is expected to be executed next.
3. If there wasn't cache memory, the CPU would have to wait several cycles while an instructions was fetched from main memory.
### Cache management
- Since cache memory have limited size, **Cache management** is an important design problem.
- Selection of cache size and replacement policy can result in increased performance.
### Different levels of a storage hierarchy.
- Main memory can also be viewed as a fast cache for secondary storage, such as solid-state disked, or magnetic-disk, since data in secondary storage must be copied into main memory for use.
- The movement of information between levels of a storage hierarchy may be either explicit or implicit, depending on the hardware design and the controlling operating-system software.
    - Main memory -> cash : Hardware function
    - Disk -> Main memory : Operating system function
- The same data may appear in different levles of the storage system. This data becomes the same only after the new value of itself which is written from the higher level to lower level.
    - However in a multitasking environment, extreme care must be taken, if several processes wish to access same data 'A' then each of these processes will gain the most recently updated value of 'A'
    - In a mutiprocessor environment where, in addition to maintaining internal registers, each of the CPUs also contains a local cache, a copy of 'A' may exist simultaneously in several caches. Since the various CPUs can all execute in parallel, an update to the value of A in one cache must be immediately reflected in all other caches where A resides. This function is called **Cache coherency**
    - In a distributed environment, the situation becomes even more complex. Several copies of the same data can be kept on different computers. Because the various replicas may be accessed and updated concurrently, some system which can synchronize data is needed.

## I/O System
One of the purpose of an operating system is to hide the peculiarities of specific hardware devices from the user. In UNIX **I/O Subsystem** act those functions.
### I/O Subsystem
- A memory-management component which includes buffering, caching, and spooling
- A general device-driver interface
- Drivers for specific hardware devices only which knows the peculiarities of the specitic device to which it is assigned.